# 23.20: Obligations and The Past

###### tags: `Tag(sp23)`

* I'm planning to do Forge 3 review on Wednesday.
* Remember the definition of "configuration": the value of all relations that aren't marked `var`. Thus, if you click the Sterling button that asks for a _new_ configuration, the solver will always find a new trace that varies on one or more of those relations.
* _Do not_ try to use `example` in temporal mode. For reasons we'll get to when we talk about how Forge works, `example` and `inst` constrain _all states_ in temporal mode, and so an example will prevent anything it binds from ever changing in the trace.

## Back to LTL: Obligation

The `until` operator can be used to express a stronger sort of `eventually`. If I write `stopped until green_light`, it means _two_ things:
* the light eventually turns green; and
* the `stopped` predicate holds until the light turns green.

This operator is a great way to phrase obligations in properties and constraints. 

Some logics include a "weak" `until` operator that doesn't actually enforce that the right-hand side ever holds, and so the left-hand side can just be true forever. But, for consistency with industrial languages, Forge's `until` is "strong", so it requires the right-hand side hold eventually.

**Important**: The `until` operator doesn't prevent its _left_ side from being true after its right side is. E.g., `stopped until green_light` doesn't mean that the car can never stop again once the light is green. 



## Reminder: Priming for "next state" expressions

You can talk about the value of an expression _in the next state_ by appending `'` to the expression. So writing `flags'` means the value of the flags relation in the state after this one.

## The Past (Rarely Used, but Sometimes Useful)

You won't need to use this often, but Forge also includes temporal operators corresponding to the _past_. E.g., you can say:

`prev_state init` 

to mean that the _previous_ state satisfied the initial-state predicate. **But beware**: traces are infinite in the forward direction, but _not_ infinite in the backward direction. For any subformula `myPredicate`, `prev_state myPredicate` is _false_ if the current state is the first state of the trace.

There are also analogues to `always` and `eventually` in the past: `historically` and `once`. 

You've seen some of these in lab, or in the documentation that the lab refers you to. We won't use all these operators in 1710.

## Modeling Deadlock

A deadlock state is one where _no_ outgoing transitions are possible. How can we write a test in temporal mode that tries to find a reachable deadlock state? There are two challenges:

* How do we phrase the constraint, in terms of the transition predicates we have to work with? 
* How do we even allow Forge to find a deadlock, given that temporal mode *only* ever finds lasso traces? (A deadlock in a lasso trace is impossible, since a deadlock prevents progress!)

Let's solve the second challenge first, since it's more foundational.

### Finding Deadlocks Via Lassos

We could prevent this issue by allowing a `doNothing` transition from every state. Then from Forge's perspective there's no "deadlock", and a lasso trace can be found. 

But this fix causes new problems. If we allow a `doNothing` transition to happen _anywhere_, our liveness property is definitely destroyed, even if we were modeling a smarter algorithm. So we need to reduce the power of `doNothing` somehow.

Put another way: we started with an _overconstraint_ bug: if only lassos can be found, then we can't find a trace exhibiting deadlock. Adding `doNothing` fixes the overconstraint but adds a new _underconstraint_, because we'll get a lot of garbage traces where the system can just pause arbitrarily (while the trace continues).

We saw this phenomenon earlier when we were modeling tic-tac-toe, and wanted to work around the fact that the `is linear` annotation forces exact bounds. We can use the same ideas in the fix here.

## Finding Deadlock

Let's look at one of our transitions:

```alloy
pred raise[p: Process] {
    World.loc[p] = Disinterested
    World.loc'[p] = Waiting
    World.flags' = World.flags + p
    all p2: Process - p | World.loc'[p2] = World.loc[p2]
}
```

Notice it's split (implicitly) into a "guard" and an "action". If all the constraints in the guard are true, the transition _can_ occur. Formally, we say that if all the guard constraints hold, then the transition is _enabled_. When should `doNothing` be enabled? When no other transition is.

```alloy
pred doNothing {
    -- GUARD (nothing else can happen)
    not (some p: Process | enabledRaise[p]) 
    not (some p: Process | enabledEnter[p]) 
    not (some p: Process | enabledLeave[p]) 
    -- ACTION
    flags' = flags
    loc' = loc
}
```

We won't create a separate `enabledDoNothing` predicate. But we will add `doNothing` to the set of possible moves:

```alloy
pred trans {
    some p: Process | 
        raise[p] or
        enter[p] or 
        leave[p] or 
        doNothing 
}
```

And we'd also better create those 3 `enabled` predicates, too.

Finally, we can write a check looking for deadlocks:

```alloy
test expect {
    noDeadlocks_counterexample: {
        init
        always delta
        not always {
            some p: Process |
                enabledRaise[p] or
                enabledEnter[p] or
                enabledLeave[p] 
        }
    } is sat
}
```

which fails. But why?

The counterexample (at least, the one I got) is 3 states long. And in the final state, both processes are `Waiting`. Success! Or, at least, success in **finding the deadlock**.





