# 12: Forge 2 Review, Modeling Boolean Logic (Syntax)

###### tags: `Tag(sp23)`

Welcome back from long weekend! Today we'll start with a review of Forge 2. After that, we'll be writing a new model from scratch. Across today and Friday, we'll have 3 goals:
* distinguishiung _syntax_ versus _semantics_ (and what that even means);
* introducing sets to Forge; and
* learning a way to model recursive concepts in a language without recursion.

## Logistics

* Start on Curiosity Modeling if you haven't already. You don't need "approval", but check my advice in the megathread. Post on Ed if you have questions or concerns. 
* Professionalism is important in 1710. If you are unprofessional with your project or case study partner(s), your grade may suffer. 
* Forge update coming later today.

## Forge 2 Review

See Lecture capture. We discussed a handful of test cases that you all reported for Forge 2.

[Form link for visualization feedback](https://forms.gle/2GGtmBfSTfqFiU557). 

## Boolean Formulas

You've all worked a lot with boolean formulas before. Any time you write the conditional for an `if` statement in a programming language, and you need `and`s and `or`s and `not`s, you're constructing a boolean formula. E.g., if you're building a binary search tree, you might write something like:

```java=
if(this.getLeftChild()!= null &&
   this.getLeftChild().value < goal) { 
    ... 
}
```

The conditional inside the `if` is a boolean formula with two _variables_ (also sometimes called _atomic propositions_): `leftChild != null` and `leftChild.value < goal`. Then a single `&&` (and) combines the two.

We might describe this example in Forge as:

```alloy
example leftBranchFormula is {} for {
  And = `And0
  Var = `VarNeqNull + `VarLTLeft
  Formula = And + Var
}
```

Can you think of more examples of boolean formulas?

## Modeling Boolean Formulas

We'll start out in Froglet. Let's define some types for formulas. It can be helpful to have an `abstract sig` to represent all the formula types, and then extend it with each kind of formula:

```alloy
-- Syntax: formulas
abstract sig Formula {}
-- Forge doesn't allow repeated field names, so manually disambiguate
sig Var extends Formula {} 
sig Not extends Formula {child: one Formula} 
sig Or extends Formula {o_left, o_right: one Formula}
sig And extends Formula {a_left, a_right: one Formula}
```

If we really wanted to, we could go in and add `sig Implies`, `sig IFF`, and other combinators. For now, we'll stick with these.

As in the family-trees homework, we need a notion of well-formedness. What would make a formula in an instance "garbage"? Well, if the syntax tree contained a cycle, the formula wouldn't be a formula! We'd like to write a `wellformed` predicate that excludes something like this:

```alloy
example noCyclesAllowed is {not wellformed} for {
  And = `And0
  a_left = `And0 -> `And0
  a_right = `And0 -> `And0
}
```

Like (again) in family trees, we've got multiple fields that a cycle could occur on. We don't just need to protect against this basic example, but against cycles that use multiple kinds of field. Let's build a helper predicate:

```alloy
-- IMPORTANT: remember to update this if adding new fmla types!
pred subFormulaOf[sub: Formula, f: Formula] {
  reachable[sub, f, child, a_left, o_left, a_right, o_right]
}
```

At first, this might seem like a strange use of a helper---just one line, that's calling `reachable`. However, what if we need to check this in multiple places, and we want to add more formula types (`Implies`, say)? Then we need to remember to add the fields of the new `sig` everywhere that `reachable` is used. This way, we have _one_ place to make the change.

```alloy
-- Recall we tend to use wellformed to exclude "garbage" instances
--   analogous to PBT *generator*; stuff we might want to verify 
--   or build a system to enforce goes elsewhere!
pred wellformed {
  -- no cycles
  all f: Formula | not subFormulaOf[f, f]
}
```

We'll want to add `wellformed` to the first example we wrote, but it should still pass. Let's run the model and look at some formulas!

```alloy
run {wellformed}
```

That's prone to giving very small examples, though, so how about this?
```alloy
run {
  wellformed
  some top: Formula | {
    all other: Formula | top != other => {
      subFormulaOf[other, top]
    }
  }
} for exactly 8 Formula
```

Note this is an example of why we wrote a `subFormulaOf` predicate: if we wrote a bunch of tests that looked like this, and then added more, we wouldn't have to remember to add the new field to a bunch of separate places.

## `inst` Syntax

The syntax that you use in `example`s can be used more generally. We can define a partial instance of our own using the `inst` command. We can then provide the instance to `run`, tests, and other commands along with numeric bounds. This is sometimes _great_ for performance optimization. 

For example:

```alloy
inst onlyOneAnd {
  And = `And0  
}

run {
  wellformed
} for exactly 8 Formula for onlyOneAnd
```

Compare the statistical info for the run with and without this added partial instance information. Do you notice any changes?


## Modeling the _Meaning_ Of Boolean Circuits

We'll do this next time. This will require us to "fake" recursion, so it's a useful technique for your projects!